---
permalink: /blog/learning-to-say-i-dont-know/index.html
title: 'Learning to say "I don''t know"'
intro: "This blog post discusses my recent experiences as a Tech Lead and getting comfortable with admitting when I don't know something." 
date: 2022-07-07
---

In October 2021 I took on a new role within the Chrome DevTools team as a
Technical Lead (TL) of the DevTools Performance Tooling team, who are
responsible for all things website performance inside of DevTools, the most
well known being the Performance Panel.

My journey to this point had begun a year prior when we started building a new
panel that would come to be named Performance Insights. I was asked to build
the panel, and for the first time in my career I came face to face with Chrome
trace files. These are large JSON files that contain all the trace data that
Chrome generates when asked to perform a trace, and it’s these that contain the
information that we parse and present in the DevTools panels. It’s also part of
what other tools like Lighthouse, or third-party tools like
[WebPageTest](https://www.webpagetest.org/), use to display data.

There was a lot of knowledge and information about performance that I didn't
know. This is something that I’m never comfortable with, but as a contributor
to the team I felt happy admitting to my manager (and TL of the team) when I
didn't know things, and asking them to jump on a video call to walk me through
something. I’d never even used the HTML Canvas API, which I had to learn along
with the intricate details of Performance tracing.

When I then became TL of the team, I was suddenly the person who people would
ask questions to. On the first "official" day that I became TL, someone asked
me a question about traces and how certain trace events are represented. I
realised I didn't know, and I was going to _have to admit it_. But I'm the TL,
I'm supposed to know that! I panicked; assuming that my lack of knowledge would
now be unearthed and I'd quickly be "found out" as not being ready for this
role.

As you've probably guessed, none of that happened. I decided to embrace not
knowing, and put my efforts into figuring out _how to find out_ and fill the
gaps in my own knowledge. Sometimes I could do that by spending thirty minutes
reading a trace file and understanding how the data is linked. Other times I
could find an old design doc, or documentation that would give me the answer.
And sometimes, best of all, I had to email someone else who I thought might
well know the answer. This has been one of the best decisions I've made
recently; emailing people to ask for help has not only given me the answers I
need but helped me build relationships with a bunch of folks who I would never
have otherwise engaged with, from all over the world. One of them even
explicitly thanked me for being curious, and reaching out to ask!

Becoming comfortable saying "I don't know", or "I don't know, but I bet X
will", or "I don't know, but I'll find out for you" has become one of the most
powerful tools at my disposal. I've learned that being a good TL isn't about
knowing everything - there is simply too much to know! - but about being able
to fill those knowledge gaps and help your team be more productive as a result.
